Everyone wants to live in (a) Princeton

Urban planner uncovers yearning for sense of place - and
birds

By Kathleen McGinn Spring
Princeton Packet Business Editor
Monday, March 22, 1999

   Anton Nelessen knows exactly where citizens of the 21st
century want to live, because tens of thousands of them in
Durban, South Africa, Orlando, Milwaukee, Atlanta, Metuchen
and hundreds of other spots around the globe have told him.
   And where they want to live is ..... downtown Princeton.

   Well, perhaps not in Princeton per se, but in a place that
looks and works very much like it.
   Mr. Nelessen is a professor of urban planning at Rutgers,
the founder of ANA Vision Planning, a Princeton urban
planning firm, a reluctant Jerseyite and a man who, even in
the midst of Central Jersey sprawl, has not lost hope for a
more user-friendly landscape.
   Computer enhanced photos of parking lots and downtowns and
residential streets decorate the walls of his office. Though
they represent locales on both sides of the Equator, their
common elements are markedly alike, but not always obvious.
   Each photo is softened by trees and shrubs. 
   So, people want greenery? 
   "But not just that," Mr. Nelessen said. "People have told
us again and again that they want birds. They like the
sound. So the urban environment needs trees birds like."
   Translating residents' priorities, their vision of what
their town should look like, and how it should work, is
Vision Planning's job. "We are the spokesperson for the
average guy," Mr. Nelessen said.
   And what does the average guy want? 
   "The common denominators," Mr. Nelessen said, "are open
space, parks, water, tree-lined streets, sidewalks that go
someplace, some place to go, great streetscapes, jobs close
by, good schools, buildings which never go higher than six
stories, a way to get around that is cheap and easy, a sense
of place, parties and festivals." He knows this because he
asks. And the way he asks is by showing pictures to residents
of each town for which he prepares a design.
   Using photography combined with computer wizardry is
something Mr. Nelessen has been doing since the early '70s
when he spent two years traveling the world taking 360 degree
photos of all the major public spaces on earth.
   Now he layers elements onto photos of existing elements of
a town. One series of photos in Mr.  Nelessen's extensive
files starts with what looks like an irredeemably ugly
residential street. In photo number two, some trees soften
the space between the sidewalk and the curb on the curving
street. It looks better. As the series goes on, a row of
shrubs goes up behind the houses on the left-hand side of the
sidewalk and ornamental streetlights sprout between the trees
on the right-hand side. A few benches later, the street is a
knock-out, a wholly inviting visual treat.
   In another example that has been executed by a shore town,
a downtown corner featured cracked curbs and a crab shack
restaurant with a large sign. Not attractive.  Surprisingly,
some trees and other plantings placed around the corner,
attractive lighting and a place to sit made a huge difference
in that site, even though the tall sign remained.
   Mr. Nelessen has residents in towns he is designing rate a
streetscape, and has found that small changes can raise
approval ratings significantly. One stretch of street, for
example, had no trees. "It rated a -4," he said. After a few
trees and fences were added: "It jumped to +5."
   In what he calls "Design by Democracy," Mr. Nelessen and
his associates have taken photo series like these to town
residents gathered in public meetings all around the
world. The residents then indicate which elements are most
important to them. In a current project, the design of a new
downtown for Milwaukee, Mr. Nelessen took the
consensus-gathering one step further, putting the drawings
onto the Internet. Some 900,000 residents took the time to
evaluate and give opinions on the plans.
   These respondents want what Mr. Nelessen has found most
people want - the sense of place, the attractive
surroundings, the convenient ways of getting around, the
vital downtowns.
   This being the case, why do so few of us get this? Why,
instead, do we have impersonal developments, treeless big box
shopping centers, strip malls and hourlong stop-and-go
commutes instead?
   "Depression thinking," Mr. Nelessen said. "They just
sprawled it." The "they" to which he refers are mayors and
members of planning boards, who, in his view, granted - and
still are granting - building permits, thinking of their own
town's tax base, but caring nothing about the regional
effects of their decisions.
   In towns ringing Princeton, for example, Mr. Nelessen said
"old guys on boards have figured out that a 6,000-square-foot
ranchburger will bring in enough taxes to pay school costs,
while a $200,000 house will not." This type of thinking gives
rise to more and more spread out developments and less open
space.
   On the retail front, "West Windsor does not care about
Princeton," Mr. Nelessen declared, citing the harm shopping
centers in West Windsor have done to retail and quality of
life in surrounding towns. "I have no choice," Mr. Nelessen,
a downtown Princeton resident said, "I have to go to Home
Depot. I have to get into my car."  (The owner of a
32-year-old Mercedes that he likes to keep in its garage
space, Mr. Nelessen walks or takes buses whenever possible.)
   And even where a desire for more planned regional growth
may exist, he said, it is often frustrated because
developers' permits never expire. So, for example, a
developer who won approval 10 years ago for a housing
development, office complex or strip mall and then sat on the
permits waiting for better economic times - a common
occurrence - can go ahead and build now even though
residents' might not want the growth.
   In addition, there are zoning ordinances that frustrate
more inviting landscapes, Mr. Nelessen said. For example,
many towns will now allow trees to be planted between the
sidewalk and the curb because that space needs to remain
clear for sewer lines.
   Where will all of this lead? If sprawl remains unchecked
and towns ignore regional needs, "In 20 years we will all be
stranded in our ranchburgers," Mr. Nelessen predicted.  Gas
by then will be prohibitively expensive, and lacking a system
of public transportation, aging Boomers will rattle around in
their four bedroom Colonials, whose three car garages with
entrances leading directly to the media center/gourmet
kitchen acted as shields against their neighbors. The 65- to
75-year-old Boomer population will have 21 closets, but no
neighborhood social system and no easy way of getting around.
   But it doesn't have to be this way, and Mr. Nelessen
doesn't think it will be.
   "Boomers want to leave a legacy," he said. "And that
legacy will be the environment." He sees today's
fiftysomethings taking the reins on planning boards, pushing
for regional plans, livable downtowns, and sane
transportation.
   But if Boomers lack the will to stop it, Mr. Nelessen sees
necessity becoming the mother of more human-friendly
environments. A strong advocate of public transportation on
demand, Mr. Nelessen said a system of satellite-directed vans
taking development residents to downtown Princeton or to a
friend's house or the train station could have positive
social effects.
   "There could be a central pickup point in each
development," he said. Perhaps benches would be added and a
public bulletin board, Mr. Nelessen suggested.  Friendships
would develop as development residents waited together for a
van.
   This would be preferable to endless, faceless sprawl, but
we can do a whole lot better, Mr. Nelessen is convinced.  And
he thinks we will because of one photograph.
   "When we saw the first shot of the Earth from the moon, it
changed everything," he said. We realized that "This really
is one place."
