INVESTIGATING THE IMPACT OF THE YEAR 2000 PROBLEM

The Year 2000 (Y2K) technology problem started as
an innocuous short-term solution to the
oppressively high cost of computer memory in the
1950s and 1960s. Programmers expected that the
problems created by the limited, two-digit method
of date storage would solve themselves as
companies, governments and other computer-owners
updated their hardware and software. Fifty years
after the introduction of the computer, the Y2K
problem has the potential to develop into a
worldwide crisis. Two common human failings
contributed to the crisis -- tendency to follow a
path of least resistance and the reluctance to
champion difficult and complex issues. The Y2K
problem does not have to be a story of failure,
however. If addressed successfully, Y2K may
encourage political and corporate leaders to
better understand and protect the critical
infrastructure.

As memory costs fell dramatically, software
writers and hardware manufacturers did not
immediately expand date variables. Newer versions
of hardware and software needed to interface with
older versions. While some programs were modified
so that a new system could accept four-digit years
and still exchange information with two-digit
based systems, the extra effort required slowed
the changeover process. Additionally, the
equipment that earlier computer experts predicted
would fall into obsolescence long before 2000
survived through layers of programming updates and
modifications. Instead of solving itself, the Y2K
problem self-propagated around the globe.

Just as programmers found it easy to follow the
tradition of using a two-digit date field,
management and leadership have found it easy to
defer addressing the Y2K problem. Y2K competes
poorly against issues such as trade agreements,
military operations, market share and product
development. It lacks familiarity, and in a
results-driven economy, Y2K remediation costs are
difficult to justify to taxpayers or
shareholders. Additionally, few wished to be
associated with the potential repercussions of a
failed Y2K remediation attempt.

At the heart of the problem lies a serious
disconnect between those who use technology and
those who create it. On a worldwide scale, leaders
of corporations and countries are struggling to
understand the Y2K problem. In the process, they
are receiving a crash course in the fragile
mechanics of information technology.

The Committee feels strongly that Y2K, as the
first widespread challenge of the information age,
must leave a legacy of increased awareness and
appreciation of information technology's role in
social and economic advancement.

UNDERSTANDING THE PROBLEM

The goal of this section is to provide background
on the Y2K problem and answer common Y2K
questions.  What is the Year 2000 computer
technology problem?  The phrases the "Year 2000
Computer Technology Problem," the "Millennium
Bug," the "Century Date Change," or simply, "Y2K"
all refer to the same problem -- defect that
exists in millions of computer programs worldwide
that causes erroneous handling of date (i.e., day,
month and year) information if not corrected. The
effect of the Y2K flaw on computer systems is not
easily predictable. It may bring a computer to a
crashing halt. It may cause the computer to
generate obviously incorrect outputs. Or
alternatively, it could allow the computer to
produce invalid data that will not be detected
until much later, forcing users to correct a range
of accumulated errors while searching for the
source of the problem.

Why is two digit notation defective?

To save memory in the early days of computing,
programmers represented four-digit years with only
two digits. For instance, 1968 or 1974 would be
stored and processed as 68 and 74,
respectively. The number 19, indicating years in
the 1900s, was implied, much as personal checks
once had the number 19 preprinted on the dateline.

This worked smoothly until users started to input
dates occurring after December 31, 1999. Computers
ran into problems when required to calculate a
number based on the difference in two dates, such
as the interest due on a mortgage loan. Computers
continued to assume that the prefix 19 was
implied, so dates such as 00 or 01 were treated as
1900 or 1901. Consequently, computers could not
correctly calculate the difference between a year
in the 20th century and a year in the 21st
century.

For example, we know that the time between July 1,
1998, and July 1, 2005 is exactly 7
years. However, a computer with a Y2K problem
could calculate an answer of either 93 years or -7
years, depending on the specific
program. Calculations that used either of these
results would be in error and may themselves cause
subsequent problems.

Another Y2K problem occurs in the storage of
information. Many kinds of data are organized and
processed by date, such as driver's license
records and credit card accounts. Computers have
had problems processing credit cards that have
expiration dates after December 1999. Due to
two-digit dating, computers have thought that
cards expiring in 2000 or later had expired almost
a century ago.

What is the scope of Y2K problems?

The Y2K problem affects two general classes of
equipment. The first class comprises business
systems or mainframe systems. These computers
perform a variety of data-intensive calculations
-- balancing accounts, making payments, tracking
inventory, ordering goods, managing personnel,
scheduling resources, etc. The second class of
equipment has several common names, including
embedded chips, embedded processors and embedded
control systems. Many aspects of modern society
rely on microchip-enhanced technology to control
or augment operations. Examples are
ubiquitous. Automatic teller machines, toll
collection systems, security and fire detection
systems, oil and gas pipelines, consumer
electronics, transportation vehicles,
manufacturing process controllers, military
systems, medical devices and telecommunications
equipment all depend on embedded chip-technology.

Y2K related failures in business systems will
generally cause an enterprise to lose partial or
complete control of critical processes. In the
private sector, loss of business systems means
that a company may have difficulty managing its
finances, making or receiving payments and
tracking inventory, orders, production or
deliveries. In the public sector, government
organizations may be severely hindered in
performing basic functions such as paying
retirement and medical benefits, maintaining
military readiness, responding to state and local
emergencies, controlling air traffic, collecting
taxes and customs and coordinating law enforcement
efforts.

Y2K problems in embedded systems have the
potential to affect public health and
safety. Problems that need to be fixed have
already been detected in medical treatment
devices, water and electricity distribution and
control systems, airport runway lighting and
building security systems. Other suspect areas are
pipeline control systems and chemical and
pharmaceutical manufacturing processes.  How was
the Y2K mistake made?  Several factors explain the
creation of the Y2K problem. In the early days of
computers, computer memory was very expensive. In
the IBM 7094 of the early 1960s, core memory cost
around $1 per byte. Today's semiconductor memory
costs around $1 per million bytes. Thus, there was
a very strong economic incentive to minimize the
amount of memory needed to store a program and its
data in the computer's memory.

Additionally, early computer programming was
highly time-consuming. Programs and data were
recorded and entered into computers via 80 column
punch cards. Each of the 80 columns could contain
exactly one byte of information, which
corresponded to one of the four digits needed to
represent a year. The cumbersome nature of punched
cards encouraged using as few of them as possible.

Although programmers and managers knew they had
built software with latent defects in it, no one
thought that software written in the 60s and 70s
would survive to the Year 2000. Compounding the
problem, newer software had to interface and share
data with the older software. Although the new
software could have handled dates internally in
four digit formats and swapped data in two digit
formats with the older software, to do so added
complexity and hence added cost to new
software. The net result was that the two-digit
standard for representing years continued much
longer than anyone would have guessed.

When will Y2K problems start?

Y2K problems have already surfaced in many
places. Cap Gemini, a technology consulting firm,
reported that as of December 1997, 7% of a group
of 128 large U.S. companies had experienced Y2K
related problems.  By March 1998, that number
leaped to 37%. The Gartner Group, an information
technology research company, has developed a model
to predict the rate of occurrence of Y2K
problems. This prediction is based on data
collected quarterly from over 15,000 firms and
government organizations in 87 countries. Gartner
estimates a rapid increase in problems in 1999
with a peak sometime after January 1,
2000. Problem occurrences will drop off after
2000, but will still occur for another 3 to 5
years at a lower level. Finally, the Information
Technology Association of America has reported
that about half the major corporations in America
have already experienced some form of Y2K
disruption as of March 25, 1998.

How can we fix Y2K and how long will it take?

It is beyond the scope of this report to cover the
technical nuances of these various
solutions. However, various techniques are briefly
described in Appendix III.

How much are Y2K fixes going to cost?

There is no generally agreed upon answer to this
question. The Gartner Group's estimate of $600
billion worldwide is a frequently cited
number. Another number from a reputable source is
that of Capers Jones, Software Productivity
Research, Inc. of Burlington, MA. Jones' worldwide
estimate is over $1.6 trillion.  Part of the
difference is that Jones' estimate includes over
$300 billion for litigation and damages but
Gartner's does not. A sense of the scale of the
cost can be gained from looking at the Y2K costs
of six multinational financial services
institutions; Citicorp, General Motors, Bank
America, Credit Suisse Group, Chase Manhattan and
J.P. Morgan. These six institutions have
collectively estimated their Y2K costs to be over
$2.4 billion. Additionally, the estimated cost of
Y2K repairs is increasing, as shown in figure 2.

Can't we develop an easy Y2K fix?

Popular sentiment suggests that a technological
quick fix will appear just in time to kill the
millennium bug. So far, "quick fix" claims have
proved to be claims for a particular product that
may show promise in one particular application,
for example, finding where the actual dates and
date processing routines are hidden in a program.

Software programs and computer hardware vary too
greatly to be fixed by one solution. Currently,
there are over 500 programming languages in use. A
universal or broadly applicable Y2K solution would
have to be compatible with many or most of these
languages. Additionally, finding all the dates and
date processing in an estimated 36,000,000
programs is an enormous task difficult to
automate.

The embedded processors pose another
problem. Although the percentage of embedded chips
with a Y2K problem is estimated to be relatively
small, potentially millions of chips exist that
may have to be replaced. Unfortunately, most of
them are not readily accessible or easily
modified.

Where can I learn more about the Y2K problem?

Many solid references can be found in the endnotes
of this section and elsewhere in this report. An
enormous amount of Y2K information resides on the
Internet. However, legitimate information is
buried among overstated rumors and half-truths. As
with most other information derived from Internet
sources, Y2K information must be verified for
accuracy.

Additional information can be obtained through the
Committee's website at www.senate.gov/~y2k and the
President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion's
website at www.y2k.gov.

CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES

Critical infrastructures can include both
computerized services and physical services
essential to minimum functioning of economy and
government. More than abstract systems, critical
infrastructures enable the average person to use
an ATM, make a phone call and fly on an
airline. In the past, many of these key
infrastructures or sectors were separate. However,
advances in information technology have caused
many of these systems to be interconnected and
linked through networks. The Committee has
approached the critical infrastructures by
examining the Y2K work occurring both vertically
within specific sectors and horizontally across
different interrelated sectors, such as banking
and telecommunications.

Recognizing that the Y2K problem could have
serious implications on the smooth functioning of
our defense and economy, Senator Moynihan wrote
President Clinton in July of 1996 and suggested a
special Y2K commission. While Senator Moynihan's
suggestion was not taken, Executive Order 13010
created the President's Commission on Critical
Infrastructure Protection. The Commission was not
tasked to study Y2K, but it recognized the
potential for the Y2K problem to cause long-term
problems in the infrastructures. Due to late
starts, many organizations have contracted out
work on sensitive systems. In some cases,
organizations are sending code overseas to foreign
firms. The correction of code overseas could lead
to increased incidents of corporate espionage and
intentional cyber disruptions. The broad scope of
Y2K corrections could allow an adversary to build
an exceptional understanding of sensitive systems
thus enabling it to "design a subtle or
comprehensive attack" against critical systems.

It is absolutely vital that the owners, operators
and regulators of the nation's critical systems
continue to be aware that Y2K may provide an
opportunity for those with malicious
intent. Sandia National Laboratories warned the
Committee that:

"Thinking that we will be so preoccupied with Y2K
that we would not notice deliberate malicious
intent, terrorists, hackers and other criminals
might see Y2K as a prime opportunity to attack
pieces of our infrastructure. Or they might use
Y2K-induced infrastructure failures as cover for
theft, arson, bombings, etc. We must be watchful
of such groups in the months leading up to Y2K and
we must be especially careful when monitoring the
crisis as it occurs to discern deliberate intent."

Current national security and emergency
preparedness policies are not designed for the
challenges of the information age. The U.S. needs
a system or process whereby the government can
coordinate responses with the privately owned and
operated critical infrastructures. We must build
the broad based contingency plans necessary to
ensure that the national security and emergency
preparedness posture of the U.S. is not
compromised by Y2K. The U.S. must remain ready to
mitigate the (economic, emergency or security)
effects that could be caused by Y2K.

Y2K is an opportunity to educate ourselves first
hand about the nature of 21st century
threats. Technology has provided the U.S. with
many advantages, but it also creates many new
vulnerabilities. Recognizing shifts in the
technological topography of the nation requires
vision. Reverting to a world without microchips or
technology-dependent systems is not only
undesirable, but also impossible. Instead, we, as
a nation and as individuals, need to consider
carefully our reliance on information technology
and the consequences of interconnectivity, and
work to protect that which we have so long taken
for granted.

FORMATION OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE

Senator Robert Bennett first identified the Year
2000 as an issue for the legislative agenda in
1996 as the Senate organized for the 105th
Congress. He shared his concerns with Senator
Alfonse D'Amato, Chairman of the Senate Banking
Committee, who urged Senator Bennett to take up
the issue in his new role as Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Financial Services and Technology.

The Subcommittee naturally focused its first
efforts on the regulators' efforts to ensure Y2K
compliance. In February 1997 and again in April
1997, Senators D'Amato and Bennett requested
information on Y2K preparations from the following
financial regulatory agencies:

 * The Federal Reserve Board (FRB)

 * The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)

 * The Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS)

 * The National Credit Union Administration (NCUA)

 * The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)

 * The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)

Shortly after the Committee inquiry, the Federal
Financial Institutions Examination Council
(FFIEC), an inter agency body made up of FRB,
FDIC, OTS, NCUA and OCC, issued guidelines for the
financial institutions and federal examiners to
focus on issues they must address to avoid major
service disruptions due to Y2K.

Individual agency responses revealed varying
degrees of readiness. The SEC's response detailed
extensive plans for remediation and testing, while
other agencies demonstrated little more than a
general awareness and initial response to the
problem. Many of the regulatory agencies deferred
to statements published by FFIEC without providing
any substantive information about their own
progress. These results prompted Senator Bennett
to conduct the first hearing on financial services
and the Year 2000 on July 10, 1997.

At the end of the first hearing, Senator
Christopher Dodd quickly recognized the importance
of the Y2K issue and voiced his support for
additional hearings on Y2K. The Subcommittee held
another eight hearings to investigate the scope
and severity of the Y2K problem and to prompt
action in the financial community.

On November 10, 1997, Senator Bennett introduced
the Computer Remediation and Shareholder
Protection Act of 1997 (CRASH Protection Act),
which required the Securities and Exchange
Commission to increase its disclosure regulations
relative to Y2K readiness. With the threat of the
CRASH Protection Act looming, the SEC redoubled
its efforts to raise awareness of Y2K
implications.

Also in November 1997, Senator Bennett wrote
President Clinton to express concern over a lack
of national leadership in the Y2K arena. The
Senator suggested the appointment of a Y2K "czar"
to oversee the Y2K compliance of the federal
government and initiate a public-private Y2K
action. Three months later, President Clinton
issued Executive Order 13073, creating the
President's Council on Year 2000
Conversion. Subsequently, John Koskinen was tapped
to chair the new council.

During these events, the Subcommittee struggled to
reach industries outside of banking. SEC
disclosures provided a tool, albeit blunt, to
raise Y2K awareness and planning within public
companies. Despite staff bulletins emphasizing the
application of disclosure law to the Y2K issue,
the level of information disclosed in March 1998
was disappointingly low. Indeed, some companies
overlooked Y2K entirely under the premise that Y2K
did not present a material threat to their
businesses. Meanwhile, off-the-record discussions
with Subcommittee staff suggested that many
corporations preferred to incur SEC fines than a
drop in their stock prices. The Subcommittee
invited the SEC to a June 1998 hearing, which led
to additional guidance in the form of an
interpretive release on Y2K disclosure. However,
the point was made that the Subcommittee on
Financial Services and Technology simply did not
provide the scope necessary to adequately address
the breadth and depth of the Y2K problem.

Voicing this concern, Senators Bennett and Dodd
met with the Senate leadership. Senate Majority
Leader Trent Lott recognized the importance of
Senate leadership in the Y2K arena and with the
assistance of Minority Leader Tom Daschle, cleared
the way for the creation of the Special Committee
on the Year 2000 Technology Problem.

On April 2, 1998, the U.S. Senate unanimously
voted to establish a new committee to address the
Y2K technology problem. The Special Committee on
the Year 2000 Technology Problem was authorized
through February 29, 2000. The Majority Leader
named Senator Bennett to serve as its
Chairman. Committee membership included:

 * Vice-Chairman Senator Christopher Dodd
(D-Connecticut)

 * Senator Jon Kyl (R-Arizona)

 * Senator Susan Collins (R-Maine)

 * Senator Gordon Smith (R-Oregon)

 * Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D-New York)

 * Senator Jeff Bingaman (D-New Mexico)

 * Senator Ted Stevens (R-Alaska) ex-officio

 * Senator Robert Byrd (D-West Virginia) ex-officio

Because the Committee does not have legislative
authority, each of the members was carefully
selected based on membership on other committees,
such as Judiciary, Armed Services and Government
Affairs.

According to the legislation that created it, the
Senate Special Committee on the Year 2000
Technology Problem will exist until February 29,
2000, after which it will permanently disband.
